# ADR 1: Crystallographic computing libraries cctbx / dxtbx are only used during import

## Context

The crystallographic computing libraries `dxtbx` (data file handling, experimental geometry) and `cctbx` (for crystal symmetry, etc) are very powerful and fast but they can be difficult to use in python. They consist mainly of c-code with python bindings, and the API is often undocumented. However, for the purposes of mdx2, only a small subset of the dxtbx and cctbx functionality is needed, for instance to go from pixel location to Miller Index (h, k, l), compute correction factors, and read data from detector images in a variety of formats.

## Decision

We will only invoke `*tbx` functions during `mdx2.import_*` steps, and all subsequent steps should rely on pre-computed data stored in the imported nexus files (e.g. `data.nxs` and `geometry.nxs`). For clean separation at the code level, we will confine all `*tbx`dependencies to the `dxtbx_machinery` module.

## Status

Accepted

## Consequences

**Positives:**

The mdx2 core libraries are relatively clean and readable, since they rely on standard scientific python (numpy, scipy, pandas) and always read and write the same types of files (nexus).

By first copying the raw data, we are free to choose chunking and compression schemes that minimize io and enable more efficient parallelization.

**Negatives:**

Mdx2 duplicates the raw data before processing, which takes disk space and time.

In mdx2, the computation of correction factors and Miller Indices for each pixel is performed by linear interpolation on a grid of tabulated (pre-computed) points. This is numerically less accurate than computing them directly for each pixel using dxtbx. The accuracy of the interpolated values depends on the grid spacing, which becomes another variable in the calculation that needs to be determined.

Correct indexing has to be known at the start of data processing in mdx2 (it is not possible to reindex into a different space group later on, since that would require cctbx).

When adding new features that require additional information from cctbx or dxtbx, the nexus objects have to be modified (i.e. `geometry.nxs`, `data.nxs`). This means that mdx2 may not be able to read files produced by older versions.
